README.md, before:

# Google Cloud Platform (GCP) Reference Platform

This reference platform `Configuration` for Kubernetes and Data Services is a starting point to
build, run, and operate your own internal cloud platform and offer a self-service console and API to
your internal teams.

It provides platform APIs to provision fully configured GKE clusters, with secure networking, and
stateful cloud services (Cloud SQL) designed to securely connect to the nodes in each GKE cluster --
all composed using cloud service primitives from the [Crossplane GCP
Provider](https://doc.crds.dev/github.com/crossplane/provider-gcp). App deployments can securely
connect to the infrastructure they need using secrets distributed directly to the app namespace.

## Quick Start

### Platform Ops/SRE: Run your own internal cloud platform

There are two ways to run Universal Crossplane:

1. Hosted on Upbound Cloud
1. Self-hosted on any Kubernetes cluster.

To provision the GCP Reference platform, you can pick the option that is best for you. 

We'll go through each option in the next sections.

### Upbound Cloud Hosted UXP Control Plane

Hosted Control planes are run on Upbound's cloud infrastructure and provide a restricted
Kubernetes API endpoint that can be accessed via `kubectl` or CI/CD systems.

#### Create a free account in Upbound Cloud

1. Sign up for [Upbound Cloud](https://cloud.upbound.io/register).
1. When you first create an Upbound Account, you can create an Organization

#### Create a Hosted UXP Control Plane in Upbound Cloud

1. Create a `Control Plane` in Upbound Cloud (e.g. dev, staging, or prod).
1. Connect `kubectl` to your `Control Plane` instance.
   * Click on your Control Plane
   * Select the *Connect Using CLI*
   * Paste the commands to configure your local `kubectl` context
   * Test your connectivity by running `kubectl -n upbound-system get pods`

#### Installing UXP on a Kubernetes Cluster

The other option is installing UXP into a Kubernetes cluster you manage using `up`, which
is the official CLI for interacting with Upbound Cloud and Universal Crossplane (UXP).

There are multiple ways to [install up](https://cloud.upbound.io/docs/cli/#install-script),
including Homebrew and Linux packages.

```console
curl -sL https://cli.upbound.io | sh
```

Ensure that your kubectl context is pointing to the correct cluster:

```console
kubectl config current-context
```

Install UXP into the `upbound-system` namespace:

```console
up uxp install
```

Validate the install using the following command:

```console
kubectl -n upbound-system get all
```

#### Install the Crossplane kubectl extension (for convenience)

Now that your kubectl context is configured to connect to a UXP Control Plane,
we can install this reference platform as a Crossplane package.

```console
curl -sL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/crossplane/crossplane/master/install.sh | sh
cp kubectl-crossplane /usr/local/bin
```

#### Install the Platform Configuration

```console
PLATFORM_VERSION=v0.0.7
PLATFORM_CONFIG=registry.upbound.io/upbound/platform-ref-gcp:${PLATFORM_VERSION}

kubectl crossplane install configuration ${PLATFORM_CONFIG}
kubectl get pkg
```

#### GCP Provider Setup

Set up your GCP account keyfile by following the instructions on:
https://crossplane.io/docs/v1.0/getting-started/install-configure.html#select-provider

Ensure that the following roles are added to your service account:

* `roles/compute.networkAdmin`
* `roles/container.admin`
* `roles/iam.serviceAccountUser`

Then create the secret using the given `creds.json` file:

```console
kubectl -n upbound-system create secret generic gcp-creds --from-file=key=./creds.json
```

Create the `ProviderConfig`, ensuring to set the `projectID` to your specific GCP project:

```console
kubectl apply -f examples/provider-default-gcp.yaml
```

#### Invite App Teams to you Organization in Upbound Cloud

1. Create a Team `team1`.
1. Invite app team members and grant access to `Control Planes` and `Repositories`.

### App Dev/Ops: Consume the infrastructure you need using kubectl

#### Join your Organization in Upbound Cloud

1. **Join** your [Upbound Cloud](https://cloud.upbound.io/register)
   `Organization`
1. Verify access to your team `Control Planes` and Registries

#### Provision a Kubernetes cluster using kubectl

1. Provision a `Cluster` resource (claim for `CompositeCluster`) provided by the platform `Configuration`:

```console
kubectl -n upbound-system apply -f examples/cluster.yaml
```

1. View status / details of the managed resources created for your claim:

```console
kubectl get managed
```

1. Check status of your claim:

```console
kubectl -n upbound-system get cluster
```

#### View your Infrastructure on the Upbound Cloud Console

1. Go to `Control Planes` for your organization.
1. Click on your Control Plane.
1. Click on `platform-ref-gcp` under Configurations section on the left.
1. Check the composite resources and navigate between resource instances that were created for the claims we just created.

### Cleanup & Uninstall

#### Cleanup Resources

1. Delete `Cluster` claim:

```console
kubectl -n upbound-system delete -f examples/cluster.yaml
```

2. Verify all underlying resources have been cleanly deleted:

```console
kubectl get managed
```

#### Uninstall Provider & Platform Configuration

```console
kubectl delete configurations.pkg.crossplane.io platform-ref-gcp
kubectl delete providers.pkg.crossplane.io provider-gcp
kubectl delete providers.pkg.crossplane.io provider-helm
```

## APIs in this Configuration

* `Cluster` - provision a fully configured Kubernetes cluster
  * [definition.yaml](cluster/definition.yaml)
  * [composition.yaml](cluster/composition.yaml) includes (transitively):
    * `GKECluster`
    * `NodePool`
    * `HelmReleases` for Prometheus and other cluster services.
* `Network` - fabric for a `Cluster` to securely connect the control plane, pods, and services
  * [definition.yaml](network/definition.yaml)
  * [composition.yaml](network/composition.yaml) includes:
    * `Network`
    * `Subnetwork`

## Customize for your Organization

Create a `Repository` called `platform-ref-gcp` in your Upbound Cloud `Organization`.

Set these to match your settings:

```console
UPBOUND_ORG=acme
UPBOUND_ACCOUNT_EMAIL=me@acme.io
REPO=platform-ref-gcp
VERSION_TAG=v0.0.7
REGISTRY=registry.upbound.io
PLATFORM_CONFIG=${REGISTRY:+$REGISTRY/}${UPBOUND_ORG}/${REPO}:${VERSION_TAG}
```

Clone the GitHub repo.

```console
git clone https://github.com/upbound/platform-ref-gcp.git
cd platform-ref-gcp
```

Login to your container registry.

```console
docker login ${REGISTRY} -u ${UPBOUND_ACCOUNT_EMAIL}
```

Build package.

```console
up xpkg build --name package.xpkg --ignore ".github/*,.github/*/*,examples/*,hack/*"
```

Push package to registry.

```console
up xpkg push ${PLATFORM_CONFIG} -f package.xpkg
```

Install package into an Upbound `Control Plane` instance.

```console
kubectl crossplane install configuration ${PLATFORM_CONFIG}
```

The cloud service primitives that can be used in a `Composition` today are
listed in the Crossplane provider docs:

* [Crossplane GCP Provider](https://doc.crds.dev/github.com/crossplane/provider-gcp)

To learn more see [Configuration
Packages](https://crossplane.io/docs/v0.14/getting-started/package-infrastructure.html).

## Learn More

If you're interested in building your own reference platform for your company,
we'd love to hear from you and chat. You can setup some time with us at
info@upbound.io.

For Crossplane questions, drop by [slack.crossplane.io](https://slack.crossplane.io), and say hi!

Commit message:

Migrate GCP Reference Platform to Upbound Official Providers
* Migrate all XRD and Compositions to OP
* Update package meta and examples
* Use compositeNetworkSelector with matchLabels propagation
* Add ServiceAccount creation within GKE Composition
* Add ServiceAccountKey for Helm ProviderConfig
* Reliably propagate ServiceAccount to Cluster and NodePool through XR status
* Create ProjectIAMMember association
* Update prometheus operator version to currently available one
* Strict versioning in meta config

Signed-off-by: Yury Tsarev <yury@upbound.io>

README.md, after:

# Google Cloud Platform (GCP) Reference Platform

This reference platform `Configuration` for Kubernetes and Data Services is a starting point to
build, run, and operate your own internal cloud platform and offer a self-service console and API to
your internal teams.

It provides platform APIs to provision fully configured GKE clusters, with secure networking, and
stateful cloud services (Cloud SQL) designed to securely connect to the nodes in each GKE cluster --
all composed using cloud service primitives from the [Upbound Official GCP
Provider](https://marketplace.upbound.io/providers/upbound/provider-gcp). App deployments can securely
connect to the infrastructure they need using secrets distributed directly to the app namespace.

## Quick Start

### Platform Ops/SRE: Run your own internal cloud platform

There are two ways to run Universal Crossplane:

1. Hosted on Upbound Cloud
1. Self-hosted on any Kubernetes cluster.

To provision the GCP Reference platform, you can pick the option that is best for you.

We'll go through each option in the next sections.

### Upbound Cloud Hosted UXP Control Plane

Hosted Control planes are run on Upbound's cloud infrastructure and provide a restricted
Kubernetes API endpoint that can be accessed via `kubectl` or CI/CD systems.

#### Create a free account in Upbound Cloud

1. Sign up for [Upbound Cloud](https://cloud.upbound.io/register).
1. When you first create an Upbound Account, you can create an Organization

#### Create a Hosted UXP Control Plane in Upbound Cloud

1. Create a `Control Plane` in Upbound Cloud (e.g. dev, staging, or prod).
1. Connect `kubectl` to your `Control Plane` instance.
   * Click on your Control Plane
   * Select the *Connect Using CLI*
   * Paste the commands to configure your local `kubectl` context
   * Test your connectivity by running `kubectl -n upbound-system get pods`

#### Installing UXP on a Kubernetes Cluster

The other option is installing UXP into a Kubernetes cluster you manage using `up`, which
is the official CLI for interacting with Upbound Cloud and Universal Crossplane (UXP).

There are multiple ways to [install up](https://cloud.upbound.io/docs/cli/#install-script),
including Homebrew and Linux packages.

```console
curl -sL https://cli.upbound.io | sh
```

Ensure that your kubectl context is pointing to the correct cluster:

```console
kubectl config current-context
```

Install UXP into the `upbound-system` namespace:

```console
up uxp install
```

Validate the install using the following command:

```console
kubectl -n upbound-system get all
```

#### Install the Crossplane kubectl extension (for convenience)

Now that your kubectl context is configured to connect to a UXP Control Plane,
we can install this reference platform as a Crossplane package.

```console
curl -sL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/crossplane/crossplane/master/install.sh | sh
cp kubectl-crossplane /usr/local/bin
```

#### Install the Platform Configuration

```console
PLATFORM_VERSION=v0.0.7
PLATFORM_CONFIG=registry.upbound.io/upbound/platform-ref-gcp:${PLATFORM_VERSION}

kubectl crossplane install configuration ${PLATFORM_CONFIG}
kubectl get pkg
```

#### GCP Provider Setup

Set up your GCP account keyfile by following the instructions on:
https://crossplane.io/docs/v1.9/getting-started/install-configure.html#select-a-getting-started-configuration

Ensure that the following roles are added to your service account:

* `roles/compute.networkAdmin`
* `roles/container.admin`
* `roles/iam.serviceAccountUser`
* `roles/iam.securityAdmin`
* `roles/iam.serviceAccountAdmin`
* `roles/iam.serviceAccountKeyAdmin`

Then create the secret using the given `creds.json` file:

```console
kubectl -n upbound-system create secret generic gcp-creds --from-file=key=./creds.json
```

Create the `ProviderConfig`, ensuring to set the `projectID` to your specific GCP project:

```console
kubectl apply -f examples/provider-default-gcp.yaml
```

#### Invite App Teams to you Organization in Upbound Cloud

1. Create a Team `team1`.
1. Invite app team members and grant access to `Control Planes` and `Repositories`.

### App Dev/Ops: Consume the infrastructure you need using kubectl

#### Join your Organization in Upbound Cloud

1. **Join** your [Upbound Cloud](https://cloud.upbound.io/register)
   `Organization`
1. Verify access to your team `Control Planes` and Registries

#### Provision a Kubernetes cluster using kubectl

1. Provision a `Cluster` resource (claim for `CompositeCluster`) provided by the platform `Configuration`:

```console
kubectl -n upbound-system apply -f examples/cluster.yaml
```

1. View status / details of the managed resources created for your claim:

```console
kubectl get managed
```

1. Check status of your claim:

```console
kubectl -n upbound-system get cluster
```

#### View your Infrastructure on the Upbound Cloud Console

1. Go to `Control Planes` for your organization.
1. Click on your Control Plane.
1. Click on `platform-ref-gcp` under Configurations section on the left.
1. Check the composite resources and navigate between resource instances that were created for the claims we just created.

### Cleanup & Uninstall

#### Cleanup Resources

1. Delete `Cluster` claim:

```console
kubectl -n upbound-system delete -f examples/cluster-claim.yaml
```

2. Verify all underlying resources have been cleanly deleted:

```console
kubectl get managed
```

#### Uninstall Provider & Platform Configuration

```console
kubectl delete configurations.pkg.crossplane.io platform-ref-gcp
kubectl delete providers.pkg.crossplane.io provider-gcp
kubectl delete providers.pkg.crossplane.io provider-helm
```

## APIs in this Configuration

* `Cluster` - provision a fully configured Kubernetes cluster
  * [definition.yaml](cluster/definition.yaml)
  * [composition.yaml](cluster/composition.yaml) includes (transitively):
    * `GKECluster`
    * `NodePool`
    * `HelmReleases` for Prometheus and other cluster services.
* `Network` - fabric for a `Cluster` to securely connect the control plane, pods, and services
  * [definition.yaml](network/definition.yaml)
  * [composition.yaml](network/composition.yaml) includes:
    * `Network`
    * `Subnetwork`

## Customize for your Organization

Create a `Repository` called `platform-ref-gcp` in your Upbound Cloud `Organization`.

Set these to match your settings:

```console
UPBOUND_ORG=acme
UPBOUND_ACCOUNT_EMAIL=me@acme.io
REPO=platform-ref-gcp
VERSION_TAG=v0.0.7
REGISTRY=registry.upbound.io
PLATFORM_CONFIG=${REGISTRY:+$REGISTRY/}${UPBOUND_ORG}/${REPO}:${VERSION_TAG}
```

Clone the GitHub repo.

```console
git clone https://github.com/upbound/platform-ref-gcp.git
cd platform-ref-gcp
```

Login to your container registry.

```console
docker login ${REGISTRY} -u ${UPBOUND_ACCOUNT_EMAIL}
```

Build package.

```console
up xpkg build --name package.xpkg --ignore ".github/workflows/*,hack/*"
```

Push package to registry.

```console
up xpkg push ${PLATFORM_CONFIG} -f package.xpkg
```

Install package into an Upbound `Control Plane` instance.

```console
kubectl crossplane install configuration ${PLATFORM_CONFIG}
```

The cloud service primitives that can be used in a `Composition` today are
listed in the Upbound Marketplace provider docs:

* [Upbound Official GCP Provider](https://marketplace.upbound.io/providers/upbound/provider-gcp)

To learn more see [Configuration
Packages](https://crossplane.io/docs/v1.9/concepts/packages.html).

## Learn More

If you're interested in building your own reference platform for your company,
we'd love to hear from you and chat. You can setup some time with us at
info@upbound.io.

For Crossplane questions, drop by [slack.crossplane.io](https://slack.crossplane.io), and say hi!
